---
title: "Predicting chronic wasting disease in white-tailed deer at the county scale using machine learning"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-06-22-paper

date: 2023-11-12
venue: 'Nature Scientific Reports'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-65002-7'

---

The study aims to predict the occurrence of chronic wasting disease (CWD) in white-tailed deer populations at the county level across 16 states in the eastern and midwestern United States using machine learning (ML) models.
CWD, a contagious and fatal neurological disease affecting deer, presents significant management challenges for wildlife agencies, particularly given the financial and logistical demands of surveillance programs. 
By applying ML techniques, the researchers developed a predictive model that identifies counties at risk of CWD, helping wildlife management to optimize surveillance efforts.

The study used a large dataset of CWD surveillance data spanning two decades, which included numerous variables such as environmental factors, cervid population density, and regulatory measures. Four ML models—Random Forest,
Decision Tree, Gradient Boosting, and Light Gradient Boosting (LGB)—were trained and tested using cross-validation to determine the most accurate model. The LGB model emerged as the most effective, demonstrating a high level
of accuracy in predicting CWD-positive counties. Key predictive factors included the use of urine lures, whole carcass importation regulations, deer movement near streams, and forest cover, which are associated with the 
introduction and spread of CWD.

The CWD Prediction Web App, based on the LGB model, provides a user-friendly platform for state agencies to identify counties at higher risk, potentially improving surveillance efficiency by focusing resources on areas
predicted to be at risk. However, the study notes limitations, including potential inaccuracies in data due to variations in local surveillance practices and the need for additional, region-specific data to refine 
predictions. The app's predictions sometimes diverged from actual surveillance data, underscoring the importance of combining the model's results with traditional surveillance approaches for comprehensive disease management.

Overall, the study highlights the potential of ML models to enhance CWD surveillance by pinpointing high-risk areas, reducing costs, and informing data-driven decisions in wildlife disease management. 
The researchers recommend iterative updates to the model with additional data to improve accuracy and expand its applicability across broader regions.
